---
layout: "project-euler-post"
problem_number: 2
problem_name: "Even Fibonacci Numbers"
date: 2024-09-14
---

> Each new term in the Fibonacci sequence is generated by adding the previous two terms. By starting with $1$ and $2$, the first $10$ terms will be: $1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, \dots$
>
> By considering the terms in the Fibonacci sequence whose values do not exceed four million, find the sum of the even-valued terms.

We want to sum all the even Fibonacci numbers up to some limit. We could generate all
the Fibonacci numbers up to that limit and just sum the even ones, but there's a cooler
method!

The recurrence relation for the $n^\text{th}$ Fibonacci number is $F_n = F_{n-1} + F_{n-2}$
with $F_0 = 0$ and $F_1 = 1$ so the first 13 terms are

```math
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, \dots
```

Notice that $F_3 = 2$, $F_6 = 8$, $F_9 = 34$, and $F_{12} = 144$. So every third number
is even, and all the others are odd. This is because $F_0 = 0$ is even and $F_1 = 1$ is
odd, so $F_2 = F_1 + F_0$ will be odd because $\text{even} + \text{odd} = \text{odd}$
by [parity](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parity_(mathematics)>). Then $F_3 = F_2 + F_1$
will be even because $\text{odd} + \text{odd} = \text{even}$. This continues and so
every third Fibonacci will be even, and all others are odd.

Now that we know every third Fibonacci number is even, can we find a recurrence relation
for just the even Fibonacci numbers? So we want to compute $F_n$ using $F_{n-3}$,
$F_{n-6}$, $F_{n-9}$, etc.

We can start by writing out

```math
\begin{align}
F_{n+3} &= F_{n+2} + F_{n+1} \\
        &= (F_{n+1} + F_n) + F_{n+1} \\
        &= 2F_{n+1} + F_n
\end{align}
```

and using this we can obtain a recurrence relation for $F_{n+6}$

```math
\begin{align}
F_{n+6} &= 2F_{n+4} + F_{n+3} \\
        &= 2(2F_{n+2} + F_{n+1}) + (2F_{n+1} + F_n) \\
        &= 4(F_{n+2} + F_{n+1}) + F_n \\
        &= 4F_{n+3} + F_n \\
\end{align}
```

So knowing that $F_3 = 2$ and $F_6 = 8$ we can use the reccurence relation

```math
F_n = 4F_{n-3} + F_{n-6}
```

to generate all the even Fibonacci numbers directly, skipping over all the odd ones!

We can implement this in Julia:

```julia
function sum_even_fibonacci(limit)
    limit < 2 && return 0

    a, b = 2, 8
    result = a + b

    while (c = 4b + a) ≤ limit
        result += c
        a, b = b, c
    end

    return result
end
```

Benchmarking `sum_even_fibonacci(4 * 10^6)` we get @benchmark[problem-0002:limit_4M]
which is pretty fast. Since the Fibonacci numbers grow exponentially, we can increase
the limit to a much larger number and still compute the sum quickly. For example,
benchmarking `sum_even_fibonacci(4 * 10^15)` only takes @benchmark[problem-0002:limit_4e15].

This solution takes $\mathcal{O}(\log L)$ time because Fibonacci numbers grow
exponentially, so only about $\log L$ terms are needed to reach the limit $L$.
